bhavatprabhāvāvidurā hi gopāstaruprapātādikamatra goṣṭhe |
ahetumutpātagaṇaṃ viśaṅkya prayātumanyatra mano vitenu: ||1||
bhavat-prabhāva-	Thy glory
avidurā: hi gopā:-	not knowing, so indeed, the Gopas
taru-prapāta-ādikam-	the trees' falling and other such (incidents)
atra goṣṭhe	here in Gokula
ahetum-utpāta-gaṇam	unreasonable ill-omens
viśaṅkya	suspecting
prayātum-anyatra	to move, somewhere else
mana: vitenu:	minds made up (decided)
The Gopas who were not aware of Thy glory and greatness, interpreted the falling of the trees and such other occurrences as unaccountable ill-omens. So they made up their minds and decided to migrate to some other place.
tatropanandābhidhagopavaryo jagau bhavatpreraṇayaiva nūnam |
ita: pratīcyāṃ vipinaṃ manojñaṃ vṛndāvanaṃ nāma virājatīti ||2||
tatra-upananda-abhidha-	there, by the name of Upananda
gopavarya: jagau	the leading Gopa said
bhavat-preraṇayā-eva	by Thy prompting alone
nūnam	certainly
ita: pratīcyām	from here to the West
vipinaṃ manojñaṃ	a pleasant forest land
vṛndāvanaṃ nāma	Vrindaavana by name
virājati-iti	is situated, thus (he said)
Indeed by Thy prompting alone, a leading Gopa named Upananda brought to their notice the beautiful forest country side called Vrindaavana, situated to the west of Gokula, as a proper location for their settlement.
bṛhadvanaṃ tat khalu nandamukhyā vidhāya gauṣṭhīnamatha kṣaṇena |
tvadanvitatvajjananīniviṣṭagariṣṭhayānānugatā vicelu: ||3||
bṛhadvanam tat khalu	Vrihadvana, that indeed
nanda-mukhyā vidhāya	Nanda and others making
gauṣṭhīnam-atha	a cowshed then
kṣaṇena	in no time
tvat-anvita-	carrying Thee
tvat-jananī-niviṣṭa-	(and) Thy mother sitting
gariṣṭha-yāna-anugatā	in the imposing vehicle, following
vicelu:	proceeded
Nanda and the others soon abandoned the Vrihadvana settlement and made it as a cowshed. They proceeded following the imposing vehicle which was carrying Thee and in which Thy mother was sitting.
anomanojñadhvanidhenupālīkhurapraṇādāntarato vadhūbhi: |
bhavadvinodālapitākṣarāṇi prapīya nājñāyata mārgadairghyam ||4||
ana:-manojña-dhvani-	of the cart, the pleasant sound
dhenu-pālī-	of the rows of the cows
khura-praṇāda-antarata:	trampling of the hooves, interspersed,
vadhūbhi:	by the ladies
bhavat-vinoda-	Thy playfully
ālapita-akṣarāṇi	spoken words
prapīya na-ajñāyata	drinking in, did not feel
mārga-dairghyam	the path's distance
The Gopikaas did not feel the distance of the path covered, as they were fully engrossed in Thy playful prattle. The pleasant sound of the cart was interspersed by the trampling sound of the hooves of the rows of the cows.
nirīkṣya vṛndāvanamīśa nandatprasūnakundapramukhadrumaugham |
amodathā: śādvalasāndralakṣmyā harinmaṇīkuṭṭimapuṣṭaśobham ||5||
nirīkṣya vṛndāvanam-	on seeing Vrindaavana
īśa	O Lord!
nandat-prasūna-	with flowers blossoming
kunda-pramukha-druma-augham	mainly Kunda and clusters of trees
amodathā:	(Thou were) delighted
śādvala-sāndra-lakṣmyā	the thick grass with its intense beauty
harin-maṇī-kuṭṭima-	(as though) green emerald inlaid
puṣṭa-śobham	(hence) adding to the beauty
O Lord! Thou were delighted to see Vrindaavana. The Kunda flowers were in full bloom and there were clusters of trees all around. Its expansive grass lands had the intense beauty as though green emerald was inlaid.
navākanirvyūḍhanivāsabhedeṣvaśeṣagopeṣu sukhāsiteṣu |
vanaśriyaṃ gopakiśorapālīvimiśrita: paryagalokathāstvam ||6||
navāka-nirvyūḍha-	in the form of a half moon (semi circle), having built
nivāsa-bhedeṣu-	the houses differently
aśeṣa-gopeṣu	when all the Gopas
sukha-āsiteṣu	were sitting comfortably
vanaśriyaṃ	the beauty of the forest
gopa-kiśora-pālī-	with the group of the young boys of the Gopas
vimiśrita:	(Thou) mingling with them
paryak-alokathā:-tvam	all around admiringly saw Thou
The Gopas built their new houses forming a semi-circle, and settled down there and were sitting peacefully and comfortably. Along with the young boys of the Gopas, Thou went about the whole place looking around admiringly, and enjoying the beauty of the forest.
arālamārgāgatanirmalāpāṃ marālakūjākṛtanarmalāpām |
nirantarasmerasarojavaktrāṃ kalindakanyāṃ samalokayastvam ||7||
arāla-mārga-	in winding ways
āgat-nirmala-āpāṃ	flowing with clear waters
marāla-kūja-	by the swans' cooings
ākṛta-narma-lāpām	making the river sound sweet
nirantara-smera-	ever smiling
saroja-vaktrām	lotus faced
kalinda-kanyām	the daughter of Kalinda
samalokaya:-tvam	Thou saw
Thou saw the daughter of Kalinda, Kaalindi or Yamunaa river which was flowing with clear waters through winding ways. The echoes of the cooing of the swans enhanced the sweet sound of the river. The thick growth of the full blown lotuses was like her ever smiling face.
mayūrakekāśatalobhanīyaṃ mayūkhamālāśabalaṃ maṇīnām |
viriñcalokaspṛśamuccaśṛṅgairgiriṃ ca govardhanamaikṣathāstvam ||8||
mayūra-kekā-śata-	with the peacocks' many calls
lobhanīyaṃ	(which was) resonant
mayūkha-mālā-śabalam	by the rays of light's multi colored radiance
maṇīnām	of the gems
viriñca-loka-	Brahma's abode
spṛśam-ucca-śṛṅgai:	as though touching with its high peaks
girim ca govardhanam-	and such a mountain Govardhana
aikṣathā:-tvam	saw Thou
Thou also saw the majestic Govardhana mountain. It was attractive by the resonant sound of the calls of the peacocks. It was radiant by the multi colored rays of the gems it contained. Its high peaks were as though touching the abode of Brahmaa.
samaṃ tato gopakumārakaistvaṃ samantato yatra vanāntamāgā: |
tatastatastāṃ kuṭilāmapaśya: kalindajāṃ rāgavatīmivaikām ||9||
samaṃ tata:	with, then,
gopakumārakai:-	the Gopa boys
tvaṃ samantata: yatra	Thou all around where ever
vanāntam-āgā:	to the end of the forest went
tata:-tata:-	there, there
tām kuṭilām-	her winding
apaśya: kalindajām	Thou saw the river Yamunaa
rāgavatīm-iva-aikām	love-lorn like, in solitude
Then with the Gopa boys where ever Thou went, even to the end of the forest, Thou came across the winding course of the Yamunaa river, as though she was a love-lorn damsel, waiting to meet Thee in solitude.
tathāvidhe'smin vipine paśavye samutsuko vatsagaṇapracāre |
caran sarāmo'tha kumārakaistvaṃ samīragehādhipa pāhi rogāt ||10||
tathā-vidhe-	in that kind of
asmin vipine	this forest
paśavye	suited for the cattle
samutsuka:	very excited
vatsagaṇa-pracāre	in the calves's tending
caran-sarāma:-atha	moving about with Balaraama, then
kumārakai:-tvaṃ	and with the young boys, Thou
samīragehādhipa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi rogāt	protect me from illness
Thou then with Balaraam and the other young boys with great excitement tended the calves in this forest which was well suited for the cattle. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Protect me from illness.